---
layout: post
title: Nim Game
subtitle: by Lucas Zhang
cover-img: /assets/img/NimGame.svg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/NimGame.svg
share-img: /assets/img/NimGame.svg
tags: [projecteuler]
---

[Original description](https://projecteuler.net/problem=301) from the Project Euler:

*Nim* is a game played with heaps of stones, where two players take it in turn to remove any number of stones from any heap until no stones remain.

We'll consider the three-heap normal-play version of Nim, which works as follows:

*  At the start of the game there are three heaps of stones.
*  On each player's turn, the player may remove any positive number of stones from any single heap.
*  The first player unable to move (because no stones remain) loses.

If $$(n_1,n_2,n_3)$$ indicates a Nim position consisting of heaps of size $$n_1$$, $$n_2$$, and $$n_3$$, then there is a simple function, which you may look up or attempt to deduce for yourself, $$X(n_1,n_2,n_3)$$ that returns:

*  zero if, with perfect strategy, the player about to move will eventually lose; or
*  non-zero if, with perfect strategy, the player about to move will eventually win.

For example $$X(1,2,3) = 0$$ because, no matter what the current player does, the opponent can respond with a move that leaves two heaps of equal size, at which point every move by the current player can be mirrored by the opponent until no stones remain; so the current player loses. To illustrate:

*  current player moves to $$(1,2,1)$$
*  opponent moves to $$(1,0,1)$$
*  current player moves to $$(0,0,1)$$
*  opponent moves to $$(0,0,0)$$, and so wins.

For how many positive integers $$n \le 2^{30}$$ does $$X(n,2n,3n) = 0$$ ?

**Solution**:

To solve the problem, we first need to define state ***S***: Write the number of stones in each heap in binary. If the number of each digits add up to 0 or 2, we called this is state ***S***. For example, $$(1,2,3)$$ is in ***S*** because their binary forms are 

$$1 = 0 1$$

$$2 = 1 0$$

$$3 = 1 1$$

and they sum up to $$2 2$$. Moreover, $$(0,0,0)$$ is also in ***S***. For another example, $$(3,6,9)$$ is not in state ***S***, because

$$3 = 0 0 1 1$$

$$6 = 0 1 1 0$$ 

$$9 = 1 0 0 1$$ 

and they sum up to $$1 1 2 2$$. 

According to [Bouton](https://doi.org/10.2307/1967631) (1901-1902), **(i)** All states ***S*** will be diminished if we move any rocks from one heap. This is because given the number of rocks in the other two heaps, the number that establishes ***S*** is unique. **(ii)** If ***S*** is diminished in the first step, it can always be re-established in the next step.

Following these two theorems, we can show that if one player starts with ***S***, he or she have to diminish it in the move and his or her opponent should always re-established ***S*** in the next step by "perfect strategy". Therefore, the player will always start his or her move with ***S***, and the number of rocks in heaps will eventually go to $$(0,0,0)$$. Namely, the player starts with $$(0,0,0)$$ and loses. Otherwise, if one player start with a non-***S*** state, he or she should establish ***S*** in his or her movement, and his or her opponent will always start the game with ***S*** and enventually lose. 

We may check how many positive integers $$n \le 2^{30}$$ would initially establish ***S***. However, it can be computationally hard. By observation of the number combination of $$(n,2n,3n)$$, we can identify that if we have in its binary form $$2n$$ equals to adding one 0 at the of $$n$$. For example, $$3 = 0 0 1 1$$ and $$6 = 0 1 1 0$$. Note that if we add a 0 at the end of 3, it becomes 6. Therefore, if we want the same digits in the three numbers add up to 0 or 2, the digits in $$n$$ have to be $$\cdots 0 \cdots$$ or $$\cdots 01 \cdots$$. The corresponding digits in $$2n$$ are $$\cdots 0 \cdots$$ or $$\cdots 10 \cdots$$, and the corresponding digits in $$3n$$ are $$\cdots 0 \cdots$$ or $$\cdots 11 \cdots$$.

Therefore, we can use either $$\cdots 0 \cdots$$ or $$\cdots 10 \cdots$$ to fill the 31 digits of the $$2^{30}$$. As the three piles of rock contain n, 2n, 3n rock, we must obeserve 11 10 01 sequence or sequesetive 0s. Supposing we have $$f(a)$$ methods to fill for $$a$$ digits, we have $$f(a) = f(a-1) + f(a-2)$$. Thus, this problem becomes to solve $$f(31)$$, excluding $$n = 0$$ but including $$n = 2^{30}$$.

**Source code in Python**:

~~~
{% highlight python %}
def f(n):
    """This function is designed to solve Nim problem (problem 301) in the ProjectEuler.
    Args:
        n: related to the indicator to 2 given in the problem. n = indicator + 1
    Return:
        return the number of positive integers that always makes the first player to 
        lose the game.
    """
    if n == 1: return 1 
    elif n == 2: return 2
    else: return f(n-1)+f(n-2)

print(f(31) - 1 + 1) #2178309, -1 for excluding 0, +1 for including 2^30
{% endhighlight %}
~~~

**Reference**: 

Project Euler. *Nim*. https://projecteuler.net/problem=301.

Charles L. Bouton. Nim, A Game with a Complete Mathematical Theory. *Annals of Mathematics*, Second Series, Vol. 3, No. 1/4 (1901 - 1902), pp. 35-39.
