---
layout: post
title: Nim Game
subtitle: by Lucas Zhang
cover-img: /assets/img/NimGame.svg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/NimGame.svg
share-img: /assets/img/NimGame.svg
tags: [projecteuler]
---

<p><dfn>Nim</dfn> is a game played with heaps of stones, where two players take it in turn to remove any number of stones from any heap until no stones remain.</p>

<p>We'll consider the three-heap normal-play version of Nim, which works as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li>At the start of the game there are three heaps of stones.</li>
<li>On each player's turn, the player may remove any positive number of stones from any single heap.</li>
<li>The first player unable to move (because no stones remain) loses.</li>
</ul>

<p>If $$(n_1,n_2,n_3)$$ indicates a Nim position consisting of heaps of size $$n_1$$, $$n_2$$, and $$n_3$$, then there is a simple function, which you may look up or attempt to deduce for yourself, $$X(n_1,n_2,n_3)$$ that returns:</p>

<ul>
<li>zero if, with perfect strategy, the player about to move will eventually lose; or</li>
<li>non-zero if, with perfect strategy, the player about to move will eventually win.</li>
</ul>

<p>For example $$X(1,2,3) = 0$$ because, no matter what the current player does, the opponent can respond with a move that leaves two heaps of equal size, at which point every move by the current player can be mirrored by the opponent until no stones remain; so the current player loses. To illustrate:</p>

<ul>
<li>current player moves to $$(1,2,1)$$</li>
<li>opponent moves to $$(1,0,1)$$</li>
<li>current player moves to $$(0,0,1)$$</li>
<li>opponent moves to $$(0,0,0)$$, and so wins.</li>
</ul>

<p>For how many positive integers $$n \le 2^{30}$$ does $$X(n,2n,3n) = 0$$ ?</p>



<p><b>Solution</b>: To solve the problem, we first need to define state <b><i>S</i></b>: Write the number of stones in each heap in binary. If the number of each digits add up to 0 or 2, we called this is state <b><i>S</i></b>. For example, $$(1,2,3)$$ is in <b><i>S</i></b> because their binary forms are </p>
<p>$$1 = 0 1$$ </p>
<p>$$2 = 1 0$$ </p>
<p>$$3 = 1 1$$ </p>
<p>and they sum up to $$2 2$$. Moreover, $$(0,0,0)$$ is also in <b><i>S</i></b>. For another example, $$(3,6,9)$$ is not in state <b><i>S</i></b>, because </p>
<p>$$3 = 0 0 1 1$$ </p>
<p>$$6 = 0 1 1 0$$ </p>
<p>$$9 = 1 0 0 1$$ </p>
<p>and they sum up to $$1 1 2 2$$. </p>
<p>According to <a href="https://doi.org/10.2307/1967631">Bouton</a> (1901-1902), <b>(i)</b> All states <b><i>S</i></b> will be diminished if we move any rocks from one heap. This is because given the number of rocks in the other two heaps, the number that establishes <b><i>S</i></b> is unique. <b>(ii)</b> If <b><i>S</i></b> is diminished in the first step, it can always be re-established in the next step. </p>
<p>Following these two theorems, we can show that if one player starts with <b><i>S</i></b>, he or she have to diminish it in the move and his or her opponent should always re-established <b><i>S</i></b> in the next step by "perfect strategy". Therefore, the player will always start his or her move with <b><i>S</i></b>, and the number of rocks in heaps will eventually go to $$(0,0,0)$$. Namely, the player starts with $$(0,0,0)$$ and loses. Otherwise, if one player start with a non-<b><i>S</i></b> state, he or she should establish <b><i>S</i></b> in his or her movement, and his or her opponent will always start the game with <b><i>S</i></b> and enventually lose. </p>

<p>We may check how many positive integers $$n \le 2^{30}$$ would initially establish <b><i>S</i></b>. However, it can be computationally hard. By observation of the number combination of $$(n,2n,3n)$$, we can identify that if we have in its binary form $$2n$$ equals to adding one 0 at the of $$n$$. For example, $$3 = 0 0 1 1$$ and $$6 = 0 1 1 0$$. Note that if we add a 0 at the end of 3, it becomes 6. Therefore, if we want the same digits in the three numbers add up to 0 or 2, the digits in $$n$$ have to be $$\cdots 0 \cdots$$ or $$\cdots 01 \cdots$$. The corresponding digits in $$2n$$ are $$\cdots 0 \cdots$$ or $$\cdots 10 \cdots$$, and the corresponding digits in $$3n$$ are $$\cdots 0 \cdots$$ or $$\cdots 11 \cdots$$.<p/>
<p>Therefore, we can use either $$\cdots 0 \cdots$$ or $$\cdots 10 \cdots$$ to fill the 31 digits of the $$2^{30}$$. As the three piles of rock contain n, 2n, 3n rock, we must obeserve 11 10 01 sequence or sequesetive 0s. Supposing we have $$f(a)$$ methods to fill for $$a$$ digits, we have $$f(a) = f(a-1) + f(a-2)$$. Thus, this problem becomes to solve $$f(31)$$, excluding $$n = 0$$ but including $$n = 2^{30}$$.<\p>
<p><b>Reference</b>: Charles L. Bouton. Nim, A Game with a Complete Mathematical Theory. <i>Annals of Mathematics</i>, Second Series, Vol. 3, No. 1/4 (1901 - 1902), pp. 35-39.</p>
